Method cards (#589)
mosaicml/composer: composer/algorithms/alibi/README.md

| ![Alibi](alibi.png) |
|:--:
|*The matrix on the left depicts the attention score for each key-query token pair. The matrix on the right depicts the distance between each query-key token pair. m is a head-specific scalar that is fixed during training. Figure from [Press et al., 2021](https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0).*|

## How to Use

### Functional Interface

TODO(MATTHEW): FIX

```python
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                            heads_per_layer=12,

>                             max_sequence_length=8192,

Author: @ajaysaini725 - Should this be 256 as below in the "hyperparameters" section?

Reviewer: Oh I got the 8192 from `composer/algorithms/hparams.py` (it was the default for the `max_sequence_length` parameter in ALiBi). I'll change it to 256

>                             max_sequence_length=8192,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                            max_sequence_length=256,
```

> import composer.functional as cf
> 
> from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
> from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
> from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention
> 
> def training_loop(model, train_loader):
>     cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
>                             heads_per_layer=12,
>                             max_sequence_length=256,
>                             position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
>                             attention_module=GPT2Attention,
>                             attr_to_replace="_attn",
>                             alibi_attention=_attn,
>                             mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)
> 
>     opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
>     loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
>     model.train()
>   
>     for epoch in range(num_epochs):
>         for X, y in train_loader:
>             y_hat = model(X)
>             loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
>             loss.backward()
>             opt.step()
>             opt.zero_grad()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                   heads_per_layer=12,
                   max_sequence_length=256,
                   position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                   attention_module=GPT2Attention,
                   attr_to_replace="_attn",
                   alibi_attention=_attn,
                   mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

    opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
    loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
    model.train()
  
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        for X, y in train_loader:
            y_hat = model(X)
            loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
            loss.backward()
            opt.step()
            opt.zero_grad()
```

### Composer Trainer

TODO(MATTHEW): Verify and provide commentary and/or comments

```python
from composer.algorithms import Alibi
from composer.trainer import Trainer

trainer = Trainer(model=model,
                  train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
                  max_duration='1ep',
                  algorithms=[Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                                                attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
                                                attr_to_replace="_attn",
                                                alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi._gpt2_alibi._attn",
                                                mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")
                  ])

trainer.fit()
```

### Implementation Details

> ALiBi is implemented by performing model surgery... TODO(MATTHEW)

Reviewer: Should prob describe in words what Event.INIT is since a reader of these method cards is not expected to be familiar with the event framework

# ⚖️ ALiBi

[\[How to Use\]](#how-to-use) - [\[Suggested Hyperparameters\]](#suggested-hyperparameters) - [\[Technical Details\]](#technical-details) - [\[Attribution\]](#attribution)

 `Natural Language Processing`

ALiBi (Attention with Linear Biases) dispenses with position embeddings for tokens in transformer-based NLP models, instead encoding position information by biasing the query-key attention scores proportionally to each token pair’s distance. ALiBi yields excellent extrapolation to unseen sequence lengths compared to other position embedding schemes. We leverage this extrapolation capability by training with shorter sequence lengths, which reduces the memory and computation load.

| ![Alibi](https://storage.googleapis.com/docs.mosaicml.com/images/methods/alibi.png) |
|:--:
|*The matrix on the left depicts the attention score for each key-query token pair. The matrix on the right depicts the distance between each query-key token pair. m is a head-specific scalar that is fixed during training. Figure from [Press et al., 2021](https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0).*|

## How to Use

### Functional Interface

> ```python

Author: @ajaysaini725 - Please add a bit of text at the beginning explaining what's happening.

import torch
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):

>     cf.apply_alibi(model=model,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Removes position embeddings and performs model surgery to replace
    # the attention function and attention mask
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
```

                   heads_per_layer=12,
                   max_sequence_length=256,
                   position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                   attention_module=GPT2Attention,
                   attr_to_replace="_attn",
                   alibi_attention=_attn,
                   mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

    opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
    loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
    model.train()
  
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        for X, y in train_loader:
            y_hat = model(X)
            loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
            loss.backward()
            opt.step()
            opt.zero_grad()
```

### Composer Trainer

> ```python

Author: @ajaysaini725 - Please add a bit of text at the beginning explaining what's happening.

## How to Use

### Functional Interface

```python
import torch
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    # Removes position embeddings and performs model surgery to replace
    # the attention function and attention mask
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                   heads_per_layer=12,
                   max_sequence_length=256,
                   position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                   attention_module=GPT2Attention,
                   attr_to_replace="_attn",
                   alibi_attention=_attn,
                   mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

    opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
    loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
    model.train()
  
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        for X, y in train_loader:
            y_hat = model(X)
            loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
            loss.backward()
            opt.step()
            opt.zero_grad()
```

### Composer Trainer

```python

> from composer.algorithms import Alibi
> from composer.trainer import Trainer
> 
> trainer = Trainer(model=model,
>                   train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
>                   max_duration='1ep',
>                   algorithms=[Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
>                                     attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
>                                     attr_to_replace="_attn",
>                                     alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi._gpt2_alibi._attn",
>                                     mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")
>                   ])
> 
> trainer.fit()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from composer.algorithms import Alibi
from composer.trainer import Trainer

# Instantiate the ALiBi algorithm
alibi = Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
              attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
              attr_to_replace="_attn",
              alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi._gpt2_alibi._attn",
              mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")

# Instantiate a trainer using the algorithm
trainer = Trainer(model=model,
                  train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
                  max_duration='1ep',
                  algorithms=[alibi])

# The trainer will automatically run the algorithm at the appopriate
# points in the training loop
trainer.fit()
```

| ![Alibi](https://storage.googleapis.com/docs.mosaicml.com/images/methods/alibi.png) |
|:--:
|*The matrix on the left depicts the attention score for each key-query token pair. The matrix on the right depicts the distance between each query-key token pair. m is a head-specific scalar that is fixed during training. Figure from [Press et al., 2021](https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0).*|

## How to Use

### Functional Interface

```python
# Run the ALiBi algorithm directly on the model using the Composer functional API 

import torch
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                   heads_per_layer=12,

>                    max_sequence_length=256,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                   max_sequence_length=8192,
```
`max_sequence_length` is the maximum sequence length that the model expects to see ever (in training AND inference), while `train_sequence_length_scaling` reshapes the training data such that it trades sequence length for batch length.

| ![Alibi](https://storage.googleapis.com/docs.mosaicml.com/images/methods/alibi.png) |
|:--:
|*The matrix on the left depicts the attention score for each key-query token pair. The matrix on the right depicts the distance between each query-key token pair. m is a head-specific scalar that is fixed during training. Figure from [Press et al., 2021](https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0).*|

## How to Use

### Functional Interface

```python
import torch
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    # Removes position embeddings and performs model surgery to replace
    # the attention function and attention mask

>     # Removes position embeddings and performs model surgery to replace
>     # the attention function and attention mask

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> import torch
> import composer.functional as cf
> 
> from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
> from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
> from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention
> 
> def training_loop(model, train_loader):
>     # Removes position embeddings and performs model surgery to replace
>     # the attention function and attention mask
>     # Removes position embeddings and performs model surgery to replace
>     # the attention function and attention mask
>     cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
>                    heads_per_layer=12,
>                    max_sequence_length=256,
>                    position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
>                    attention_module=GPT2Attention,
>                    attr_to_replace="_attn",
>                    alibi_attention=_attn,
>                    mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)
> 
>     opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
>     loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
>     model.train()
>   
>     for epoch in range(num_epochs):
>         for X, y in train_loader:
>             y_hat = model(X)
>             loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
>             loss.backward()
>             opt.step()
>             opt.zero_grad()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Run the ALiBi algorithm directly on the model using the Composer functional API 

import torch
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                   heads_per_layer=12,
                   max_sequence_length=256,
                   position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                   attention_module=GPT2Attention,
                   attr_to_replace="_attn",
                   alibi_attention=_attn,
                   mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

    opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
    loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
    model.train()
  
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        for X, y in train_loader:
            y_hat = model(X)
            loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
            loss.backward()
            opt.step()
            opt.zero_grad()
```

```

### Composer Trainer

```python

> from composer.algorithms import Alibi
> from composer.trainer import Trainer
> 
> # Instantiate the ALiBi algorithm
> alibi = Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
>               attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
>               attr_to_replace="_attn",
>               alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi._gpt2_alibi._attn",
>               mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")
> 
> # Instantiate a trainer using the algorithm
> trainer = Trainer(model=model,
>                   train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
>                   max_duration='1ep',
>                   algorithms=[alibi])
> 
> # The trainer will automatically run the algorithm at the appopriate
> # points in the training loop
> trainer.fit()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Instantiate the algorithm and pass it into the Trainer
# The trainer will automatically run it at the appropriate points in the training loop

from composer.algorithms import Alibi
from composer.trainer import Trainer

alibi = Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
              attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
              attr_to_replace="_attn",
              alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi._gpt2_alibi._attn",
              mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")

trainer = Trainer(model=model,
                  train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
                  max_duration='1ep',
                  algorithms=[alibi])

trainer.fit()
```

ALiBi (Attention with Linear Biases) dispenses with position embeddings for tokens in transformer-based NLP models, instead encoding position information by biasing the query-key attention scores proportionally to each token pair’s distance. ALiBi yields excellent extrapolation to unseen sequence lengths compared to other position embedding schemes. We leverage this extrapolation capability by training with shorter sequence lengths, which reduces the memory and computation load.

| ![Alibi](alibi.png) |
|:--:
|*The matrix on the left depicts the attention score for each key-query token pair. The matrix on the right depicts the distance between each query-key token pair. m is a head-specific scalar that is fixed during training. Figure from [Press et al., 2021](https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0).*|

## How to Use

### Functional Interface

TODO(MATTHEW): FIX

```python
def training_loop(model, train_loader):
  opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
  loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
  model.train()
  
  for epoch in range(num_epochs):
      for X, y in train_loader:
          y_hat = model(X)
          loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
          loss.backward()
          opt.step()

>           opt.zero_grad()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import torch.nn.functional as F

import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
            heads_per_layer=12,
            max_sequence_length=8192,
            position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
            attention_module=GPT2Attention,
            attr_to_replace="_attn",
            alibit_attention=_attn,
            mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
loss_fn = F.cross_entropy

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
model.train()
for X, y in train_loader:
    opt.zero_grad()   
    y_hat = model(X)
    loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
    loss.backward()
    opt.step()
```

> ```python
> def training_loop(model, train_loader):
>   opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
>   loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
>   model.train()
>   
>   for epoch in range(num_epochs):
>       for X, y in train_loader:
>           y_hat = model(X)
>           loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
>           loss.backward()
>           opt.step()
>           opt.zero_grad()
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
import composer.functional as cf

from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

def training_loop(model, train_loader):
    cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                           heads_per_layer=12,
                           max_sequence_length=8192,
                           position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                           attention_module=GPT2Attention,
                           attr_to_replace="_attn",
                           alibi_attention=_attn,
                           mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

    opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
    loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
    model.train()
  
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        for X, y in train_loader:
            y_hat = model(X)
            loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
            loss.backward()
            opt.step()
            opt.zero_grad()
```
```

Reviewer 2: Minor suggested changes:

```
        import torch.nn.functional as F

        import composer.functional as cf

        from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import _attn
        from composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi import enlarge_mask
        from transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2 import GPT2Attention

        cf.apply_alibi(model=model,
                       heads_per_layer=12,
                       max_sequence_length=8192,
                       position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                       attention_module=GPT2Attention,
                       attr_to_replace="_attn",
                       alibit_attention=_attn,
                       mask_replacement_function=enlarge_mask)

        opt = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())
        loss_fn = F.cross_entropy
        
        def training_loop(model, train_loader):
            model.train()
            for X, y in train_loader:
                opt.zero_grad()   
                y_hat = model(X)
                loss = loss_fn(y_hat, y)
                loss.backward()
                opt.step()
```

### Composer Trainer

TODO(MATTHEW): Verify and provide commentary and/or comments

```python
from composer.algorithms import Alibi
from composer.trainer import Trainer

> trainer = Trainer(model=model,
>                   train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
>                   max_duration='1ep',
>                   algorithms=[Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
>                                     attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
>                                     attr_to_replace="_attn",
>                                     alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi._attn",
>                                     mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")
>                   ])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trainer = Trainer(model=model,
                  train_dataloader=train_dataloader,
                  max_duration='1ep',
                  algorithms=[Alibi(position_embedding_attribute="module.transformer.wpe",
                                                attention_module_name="transformers.models.gpt2.modeling_gpt2.GPT2Attention",
                                                attr_to_replace="_attn",
                                                alibi_attention="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi._attn",
                                                mask_replacement_function="composer.algorithms.alibi.gpt2_alibi.enlarge_mask")
                  ])
```
